---
permalink: /
title: "A Chemical Biology Approach for de novo Discovery of Selectively Essential Metabolic Enzymes"
author_profile: true
redirect_from: 
  - /about/
  - /about.html
---

In addition to the gain-of-function somatic oncogene mutations that drive tumorigenesis, cancer cells increase biosynthesis to sustain proliferation. As opposed to oncogenes, enzymes are intrinsically druggable, and inhibitors of biosynthesis remain pillars of modern chemotherapy. However, they can cause toxicity to normal proliferative tissues and are predisposed to resistance through metabolic plasticity (Figure 1). As an alternative mechanism, disrupting catabolism can elicit tissue specific cytotoxicity independent of proliferation, which underlies numerous inborn errors of metabolism (IEM). In general, IEM are caused by recessive loss-of-function mutations in the active site or the allosteric regulatory domain of non-redundant metabolic enzymes, resulting in the accumulation of electrophilic or nucleophilic intermediary metabolites that spontaneously react with essential cellular proteins, nucleic acids, or cofactors1-3. Thus, this mechanism is a validated strategy to specifically induce cell type specific toxicity, which requires loss of both functional alleles. There are >1000 of these disease causing enzymes encoded in chromosomal proximity (1kb) to validated oncogenes or tumor suppressors that are collaterally amplified or deleted during tumorigenesis, providing a mechanism to selectively target cancer cells through enzyme dosage imbalance (Figure 1)4-7. Using the intrinsic chemistry of their endogenous ligands, my lab will develop small-molecule libraries biased towards essential catabolic enzymes, and chemical biology platforms to identify, validate and drug “selectively essential” targets for treatment of cancer and metabolic disease.

Project 1. Targeting OXA1L as strategy to treat NKX2-1 amplified lung cancers.
======
Focal or arm-level amplification of the oncogene NKX2-1 (chr14q13) and/or loss of heterozygosity at chr14q occurs in 12-53% of lung cancers36-39, and there are currently no molecularly targeted small molecule therapeutics for these alterations. We have recently developed novel compounds targeting the mitochondrial insertase OXA1L, encoded adjacent to NKX2-1 at chr14q11, which is collaterally amplified or deleted along with NKX2-1 across ~10% of samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA, Figure 2a,b). Importantly, these compounds are selectively lethal in human cancer cell lines predominantly expressing an OXA1L polymorphism that occurs in ~25% of humans (S419(AGC)5, rs148216086, Figure 2c-d)20, and acquired resistance to these compounds is conferred through amplification of the wild type (WT) OXA1L allele on chr14q (Figure 2e,f). Mechanistically, selective lethality occurs due to partial inhibition of OxPhos, which increases OxPhos-coupled de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis through dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH), resulting in imbalanced nucleotide pools. Consistently, ectopic expression of WT OXA1L in heterozygous cells collaterally increases sensitivity to the pyrimidine antimetabolite 5-fluorouracil (5-FU, Figure 2e). Based on these data, we hypothesize that NKX2-1 amplification impinges on OXA1L dosage and allelic balance, affecting the efficacy of both our novel OXA1L compounds, as well as established inhibitors of nucleotide metabolism (Figure 2g). 

Project 2. Proline catabolism as a vulnerability in hemizygous PTEN deleted cancers.
======
In addition to OxPhos complexes I and II, dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH) and proline dehydrogenase (PRODH) reduce ubiquinone upstream of complex III and IV in the inner mitochondrial membrane. Within the proline metabolic pathway (Figure 3b), loss-of-function ALDH4A1 mutations result in the accumulation of its nucleophilic substrate pyrroline-5-carboxylate (P5C), which depletes the essential cofactor pyridoxal-5’-phosphate (PLP) through Knoevenagel condensation, causing selective cytotoxicity to cells of the central nervous system and connective tissue (Figure 3d)31,42. Conversely, biallelic mutations in ALDH18A1 result in proline auxotrophy and toxicity to the same tissue. Using novel selective lethal inhibitors of OxPhos complex IV, we previously found that ALDH18A1 and ornithine aminotransferase (OAT), which produce the reactive intermediate P5C from glutamate or ornithine are downregulated on both the protein and transcript level across cell lines that were resistant to complex IV inhibitor induced cell death, whereas the enzymes catalyzing the reverse catabolic reactions (ALDH4A1 and PRODH) were upregulated (Figure 3c). Consistently, resistant cell lines were hemizygous for chr10q, encoding both ALDH18A1 and OAT adjacent to the tumor suppressor PTEN (Figure 3a), which occurs in ~15-55% of prostate, skin and central nervous system cancers23,24,43. Importantly, this relationship is maintained in patient samples taken from the cancer genome atlas, where PTEN copy number is significantly correlated with the expression of ALDH18A1 (Figure 3a). Moreover, chr10q loss decreases expression of an ALDH18A1 spliceoform (Figure 3e) required for ornithine synthesis from glutamate and ammonia detoxification, which is insensitive to allosteric inhibition by ornithine (Figure 3b)44,45. Taken together this data suggests that PTEN deletions alter the dosage of essential proline metabolic enzymes and restricts proline metabolism, providing a rationale therapeutic strategy to target PTEN hemizygous cancers through drug induced haploinsufficiency in ALDH18A1, and/or P5C mediated metabolic toxicity. 

Project 3. Harnessing Metabolism for Synthesis of Bioactive Small Molecule Libraries. 
======
To balance biosynthesis and bioenergetic homeostasis, adenine nucleotides are incorporated into numerous intermediary amino acids, proteins, lipids, carbohydrates, and vitamins, which function as orthosteric substrates and cofactors, and/or allosteric ligands that can activate catabolic enzymes when energy levels are depleted46. In general, adenine nucleotide binding motifs include a protein loop where the amino acid backbone hydrogen-bonds with N6 and N1 of the Watson-Crick edge, an acidic amino acid to interact with ribose, and series of positional polar amino acids that hydrogen bond with the phosphate(s), magnesium phosphate, and/or additional distal substituents (Figure 4a), with adenine affinity primarily driven by electrostatic interactions47-49. While orthosteric adenylate binding motifs are conserved, our preliminary analysis of published structures suggests that key differences have evolved in allosteric binding sites (Figure 4b). While allosteric sites retain the hydrogen bond pairing with adenine and ribose, the angle of the sugar and substituent distal to the 5’-ribose hydroxyl is rotated relative to the plane of adenine in comparison to a U-shaped or linear extended conformation in active sites. Moreover, allosteric sites are enriched in hydrophobic and aromatic amino acids distal to the 5’-ribose hydroxyls. In this project, we will use structure-based drug design and photoaffinity labeling to synthesize small molecule libraries biased towards allosteric catabolic enzymes and develop chemical biology platforms to delineate functional liganding events that modulate catabolic flux for treatment of metabolic disease. 
